---
layout: post
title: mini

---
There's a thread going on over at [mini-MSFT](http://minimsft.blogspot.com/2005/08/ready-set-go.html#comments) about the "good" groups at Microsoft. I said that I'm having a blast and the comments have been taken down a path of "overtime is stupid, when you're not getting paid"... I guess MSN does have a reputation as being pretty intense. And looking over my past few posts, it would bear that out.  
  
First, I hope I didn't make a mistake by posting with my real name over at mini-msft. I guess it's something of a subversive blog and is it the type of thing that even admitting _reading_ could be construed the wrong way? I don't think so, but crap, who knows. I vote for more transparency and I'm willing to put my name behind that. And I think saying whatever I have to say without hiding behind anonymity lends it more weight. But still, I admit to feeling a little weird about it.  
  
Second, the "working hard at stuff that's cool" vs. "slacking at stuff that's boring but getting paid just as much" is something I've been going back-and-forth with for a long, long time. I'm still not sure it's totally resolved; obviously the ideal would be to find a place I can work on stuff I love for just 40 hours a week. And maybe take the summers off too :\) I'm just not sure where to find that place -- it just doesn't seem like something that even exists in the software industry. I feel like I've approached it a few times but it's generally been on projects that are either enormous \(where my particular contribution wasn't that visible\) or unimportant \(where it didn't matter when it shipped\). Maybe I'm just not smart enough to do the "cool stuff" in just 40 hours/week. Or maybe I'm missing something \(else\) obvious; I'd sure love to hear about it if so.
