---
layout: post
title: A story

---
I posted this over on [Elden's](http://spaces.msn.com/members/fatcyclist/Blog/) blog, but I like the story enough to repost it here. _Viz.:_  
  
When I lived down in Olympia, my friend Scott and I rode our butts off down in Capitol Forest. We rode all the time; we planned our class schedules around getting out to ride during the week, we rode every weekend, and so on. Since it was Olympia, we rode through lots of mud and water and other bicycle-destroying crud. We decided, in the interest of saving money on parts and time on maintenance, to join the burgeoning singlespeed scene, and both built ourselves up some pretty sweet singlespeeds. We tooled around town on them, took them on some easier rides through the Forest, then, one February weekend, rolled out on their maiden "big" voyage: a 25-mile loop, whose appetizer was a 7-mile climb.  
  
So we rolled out, this chilly and \(of course\) rainy February morning, in full singlespeed glory. We were riding with a couple of other friends of ours, who weren't riding as much as we were, and we rolled ahead of them on the beginning of the climb. As we left them further and further behind, and ascended through the mist and mud and standing water, our pride at our single-speed badassedness grew. We muscled up short little ascents, kept our momentum along the steady grades; in short, we both felt fan-freakin'-tastic.  
  
After roughly an hour of climbing, we reached the sign at the trail intersection at the top of the climb, got off our bikes, and leaned them \(o glorious singlespeeds\! let all the world revel in the simplicity of your drivetrains\!\) on the sign. We sauntered over to a convenient log where we sat down, unwrapped our clif bars, and waited for our riding compatriots to come and praise us.  
  
So allow me to digress, briefly, and tell you about the trail we were about to go down: it's rocky, rooty, steep, and \(yes\) muddy. It's slippery and treacherous. Not the sort of thing you need a downhill bike for, by any means, but a tricky trail on the way down and a genuine pain in the ass on the way up.  
  
Scott and I are sitting down, chillin' out, and we hear a couple of guys riding up said nasty trail. "Cool," we thought, "people to brag to about our singlespeeds\!" \(well, Scott probably didn't think that, and I certainly wouldn't admit it in any context other than the relative anonymity of the internet\) Sure enough, two guys rolled up, we got to talking, and they did admire our singlespeed bicycles and our prowess at muscling them up the hill. And around this time our riding buddies showed up \(who I should mention were, to add sting to the you-must-think-by-now-inevitable putting-in-place that's about to happen, attractive young women\) and also exclaimed at our brilliance and we basked in the glow of our fantastic hill climbing ability with -- yes -- ONE gear\!  
  
So we're all sittin' around, talkin' bikes, and one of the two guys says, "gee, I wonder where Brett is, he shouldn't be too far behind." And but a few seconds later there came the sound of breathing and gear shifting and up comes Brett, cleaning a nasty little technical move, indeed cleaning an entire climb that I'd never succesfully ridden on any bike, rolling up like it ain't no thing. And Brett - yep, Brett Wolfe - has only one goddamned LEG. He rolled up the trail, did a trackstand \(well, maybe I'm making that part up\), said hi, and kept going, like some ego-destroying ghost.
