---
layout: post
title: Vermont 50

---
The first time I participated in the Vermont 50, I rode my bike, and I rode my bike with lots of friends who also rode their bikes. I remember seeing the runners at the start line -- and seeing them pass me during the race -- and thinking, "those people are crazy." Riding my bike was fun but I was emphatically not a runner and the idea of running even a mile seemed ludicrous, let alone 50 at once.  
  
I'd encountered ultra runners before, at the Leadville 100, which I also did on my bicycle, so the idea of ultra running wasn't totally foreign to me. But that idea seemed terrible.  
  
About 5 years later, I started running short distances on trails to see if it would help me lose weight. It did, but I also enjoyed it way more than I thought I would. I started falling asleep with the rhythm of my feet hitting the trail replaying in my head, the way the rhythm of my legs turning pedals did after a long, long ride.  
  
I ran some beautiful trails in Washington State. I ran a marathon. I \(briefly\) moved to Austin, TX and ran some trails there. In early 2009 I returned to Seattle and ran again in the forest that I'd missed so much, and decided that doing something longer than a marathon seemed like a great idea. So I called up my friend Mark, who I'd ridden with in the Vermont 50 way back when, and asked if he was planning to ride it that fall. He was, so I decided a great intro to ultrarunning would be to run 50K on a course I was somewhat familiar with, in terrain I loved, and also get the chance to hang out with a friend I'd known since 7th grade.  
  
So last year, I ran the 50K. It was fantastic. It rained all day, pretty much non-stop, and the footing was terrible and my shoes weighed about 3 pounds each with mud and the mountain bikers were complaining -- but it was beautiful. The dark grey sky enhanced the colors of the trees; the sound of the rain was soothing and soft; the height of the hills was obscured by the fog. And the best part of the race was that the whole time, I knew I was going to run further than I ever had. I did. I didn't run it fast \(in fact I ran it very, very slowly\) but I finished and got the medal and was ecstatic. And I'm sure you all know how this goes: the next day I decided that I wanted to run the "real" race, the 50 miler, the following year.  
  
As soon as registration opened for the 2010 Vermont 50, I signed up. Pressing that "submit" button scared the bejesus out of me, and invigorated me with by making concrete a goal that might be too hard.  
  
I used the race as an excuse to go on long solo run/hikes through the wilderness of the Cascades. I got a little tan, and I lost a little weight, and I saw some parts of the Cascades I couldn't believe I hadn't seen after living in the Seattle area for more than 15 years. I ran up to Cutthroat Pass as the sun rose, then ran down the other side to Rainy Pass where I'd stashed some food and drink, and couldn't wait to run back up to be surrounded by the granite peaks at Cutthroat again. I ran near Salmon La Sac and lost the trail in the snow and felt like I was 11 years old again, just out in the woods playing, confident that I would find the trail eventually. I was surrounded by Bighorn Sheep in the Enchantments and had a moment where I wasn't sure what to do if sheep turned unfriendly \(do they? What in the world would you do?\). I ran miles and miles on my hometown trails, seeing my own footprints from the previous day, continuously finding a better line through each series of rocks. I watched my 4-year-old daughter run her first kid's race and was filled with hope that her grace and speed and joy would stay with her forever.  
  
Then, sooner than seemed fair, summer was over, and I flew out to my parents' house in Massachusetts with my running shoes \(three pair, because I still couldn't decide which to wear on race day\). And then drove up to Vermont with Mark and Greg, who I'd ridden the 2001 race with, who rode in 2009, and who were riding again in 2010.  
  
Weather on race day was perfect. It wasn't too cold at the start -- I was comfortable in shorts and a t-shirt -- but never got too hot. It was slightly overcast. The trails were in perfect shape, hardened by rain for a few days and dried by steady winds on Saturday.  
  
The first 12 miles passed quickly, and then I ran for a bit with a couple of guys, Bruce and David. Bruce was experienced, and vocal, and David was young and talkative and enthusiastic, and I ran in the wake of their conversation for about 10 miles, through the long 7-mile stretch between aid stations, up & down some challenging hills and through some good singletrack. It was a joy to run with them, but their pace was a little faster than I was comfortable with, so I asked them to go ahead at the 23 mile aid station.  
  
So I kept running, and then ran some more. I must admit that I don't understand how some of you write race reports full of detail and landmarks and specific events -- my mind seems incapable of recording things like this when I'm running. I remember passing the halfway point and feeling excellent. I remember passing the 32-mile mark and getting a huge boost with the thought that every footstep meant one footstep further than I'd ever traveled on foot in one day. I had a couple of low points on uphills, I got frustrated with some downhill singletrack, but mostly I wasn't thinking, I was just running, walking, drinking or eating.  
  
I do remember getting to the 41-mile aid station and realizing I had one hour and 20 minutes to cover 6.5 miles. This seemed within my grasp, if I just kept doing what I was doing.  
  
Unfortunately the next few miles had some really tricky downhill singletrack \(at least tricky for me, since I'm not coordinated to start with, and especially not so after running 40 miles\). I lost a lot of time here, and the next thing I saw was the "5 miles to go sign" at exactly 5:25 -- giving me one hour to run 5 miles, and, more to the point, 20 minutes to run 2 miles to the next aid station at mile 47.  
  
I realized at this point that my race was over, but something interesting happened: I felt like really running. I'm not saying I was running fast or even not slow -- obviously I wasn't, because I didn't make the cutoff -- but I was running in a way that I never thought I would after so many miles. I was able to maintain my momentum up and down hills, my legs felt great, I was... well, I wasn't flying, not by any stretch of the imagination, but man I felt good, and I felt like I could run forever.  
  
Of course, I got to the aid station after 5:45, and one of the volunteers told me I'd missed the cutoff and to climb into the van for a ride to the finish. And I had to find my friends, who were waiting for me at the finish line, and did not expect to see me walk up behind them, and tell them I'd been pulled. And I ran into Bruce and David, wearing their medals.  
  
But the weird thing was, like running those last 2 miles, it didn't hurt. It felt okay. Of course I wish I'd finished the race, and I can't wait to run another 50 and actually cross the finish line. But the race functioned so perfectly as a catalyst -- a reason to run with friends from work, a reason to immerse myself in the wilderness, a reason to see my friends on the other side of the country, a reason to see my family, a way to force myself into that state of being that only comes with long, intense activity, and lasts for days after -- that those 3 miles just don't seem to matter.  
  
Now I'm counting the days to next year's Vermont 50, not to redeem myself, but because I simply can't wait to do it again.
